Overview:

In this Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:DP) Design submission, we propose to dramatically enhance the power of upcoming panoramic deep-imaging from the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST), Euclid and the Wide-Field Infrared Survey Telescope (WFIRST) to address key questions in the areas of dark energy, the galaxy ecosystem at z~2, and the assembly history of the Milky Way and Local Group Galaxies.  We will design the astrostatistics, instrumentation, and software solutions required over the next decade to provide optimized spectroscopic training sets that can unlock physical information (e.g., redshifts, galaxy star-formation histories, stellar metallicities) from deep photometry alone.  Applying machine learning to a set of ambitious Data Science Challenges using simulated data, we will define requirements on future spectroscopic training sets.  These requirements will guide the preliminary design of FOBOS, a powerful new spectrograph to deploy in 2026 on the 10m Keck II Telescope.  FOBOS will provide publicly-available deep, high-multiplex spectroscopy with high target sampling and flexibility uniquely matched to the "Big Data" training problem.

Intellectual Merit:

High-multiplex and deep spectroscopic followup of LSST and other panoramic deep-imaging surveys is a widely recognized necessity.  Reports in 2015 and 2016 by the National Research Council and National Optical Astronomical Observatory specifically recommend that the NSF support construction of required spectroscopic facilities because none currently exist or are planned at U.S. observatories.  FOBOS satisfies these spectroscopic needs at relatively low cost by utilizing the existing 10m Keck II Telescope, a highly-successful U.S.-led large telescope.  Even with the powerful capabilities of FOBOS deployed, the astronomical community recognizes the need for cutting-edge data science techniques to "train" vast photometric surveys with what will necessarily be more limited spectroscopy.  Success in the training methodologies we propose here will make photometric redshifts more precise, improving the LSST dark energy figure-of-merit by 40%.  They will enable a comprehensive understanding of galaxies and their gaseous environments at z~2, and they will reveal fossilized structures in the Milky Way, M31, and other Local Group galaxies through chemical signatures inferred for millions of stars.

Broader Impacts:

We will build on the success of several ongoing programs at UC Santa Cruz (UCSC) that connect high school and college students, especially those from underrepresented minorities, to active research groups.  Studies show that such connections increase STEM retention.  The flagship program is Akamai, run by UCSC's Institute for Scientist and Engineer Educators (ISEE), which advances college students from Hawai'i into the STEM workforce.  Our proposal supports two Akamai interns to work at UCSC on instrument simulation and design as well as machine learning for spectroscopic analysis.  We will also engage a cohort of graduate students in ISEE's Professional Development Program, which builds teaching skills as students develop an inquiry-based activity. The graduate students will then conduct this activity, centered on FOBOS instrument development, with 25 largely underrepresented community college students from UCSC's Lamat program.  Finally, we will take advantage of a successful hands-on research course and a long-running summer internship program to introduce data simulation and machine-learning techniques to first-year undergraduate and senior high school students.

